---
title: 'Getting Greened'
date: 2025-01-14
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-4/
tags:
  - Green Card
  - USCIS
---

I started the Green Card process about to years ago and it's still ongoing. 
This process is extensive to say the least and really makes you think about immigration in general. It's unbelievable how much of your life you put on hold to get permanent residency, but the most shocking part is, I am doing it the fast and easy way. 

# Getting Started

After I obtained my Ph.D. in December 2021, I knew it was the time to start looking into applying for a Green Card. I knew there was a route for people holding Advanced Degrees that didn't require the sponsorship of a company or employer (National Interest Waiver or NIW). 

I admit I could have started the process sooner in 2022 andsimply didn't because I was processing my OPT and subsequently my STEM OPT. For those who don't know, these are temporary work authorizations given to international students after graduation. My attorneys told me that it's possible to file a GC application while filing a OPT application but not simple. The issue is that, when you file for a temporary work authorization, you have 'non-immigrant intent' whereas filing for a GC obviously has 'immigrant intent'. I believe attroneys have ways of reconciling the two for the USCIS.

I googled immigration law firms and found the North America Immigration Law Group. They had really good reviews on Google and high success rate. They were really kind and helpful througout the whole process for which I am really thankful and glad I selected them. 

# The petition step (I-140 form)

The first step in the process is file a petition where you convince the U.S. government that you are useful to the country. For this application, I had to gather reprints of my publications, Usage statistics of the software I developed, evidence of my role as reviewer for a journal, citation statistics, and letters of recommendations. The lawyers made a really good job at putting together a very comprehensive form with clear examples of my contributions and making a very convincing case that I will be a very prodiuctive and 'useful' researcher for the country. 

## Do I need to hire an attorney? 

While I think I would have been capable of putting together the application myself, I believe that hiring an attorney is worth every penny. 

First, they have a lot of experience in making a case convincing. I am not saying I wouldn't be able to make a convincing case for myself, but I would definetely not think of so many details. For this step, you need to prove the following points:

 - The applicant's is a member of the professions holding an advanced degree;
 - The applicant's proposed endeavor has both substantial merit and national importance;
 - The applicant's is well positioned to advance the proposed endeavor; and
 - On balance, it would be beneficial to the United States to waive the requirements of a job offer and thus of a labor certification.

For example, although my research is not directly related to any disease, they asked me to make connections to disease to show their potential value for treatment. They also mention the number of people in the U.S. suffering from those diseases. For my academic record, they made high emphasis on my publications, the number of people that read and cite these journals and their impact factor. They also mentioned the percentile of my publications based on citations and other metrics.

Additionally, they mentioned the context in which my work was cited by others. For example:

""Jain et al. of the University of Vienna in Austria cited Dr. Quinones Valdez’s research three times in their review article entitled “The Editor’s I on Disease Development” (Trends in Genetics, 2019). This group highlighted his discovery that TDP-43 enhances ADAR1 expression as an important development in biotechnology research. As review articles concisely summarize the most notable recent advances in a given area of scientific inquiry, the authors’ inclusion of Dr. Quinones Valdez’s research in their review is a sign of its value to the field""

Secondly, they know the USCIS very well. From their experience, they know what kind of applications are accepted and what kind are rejected. Based on the strength of your case, they may request more or less recommendation letters. Also, small details that would have never crossed my mind like signing forms on physical paper with pen are preferred by the USCIS. In fact, it is possible they won't trust an electronic signature. 

In the petition letter, they cite many law articles and direcrtly address them with evidence. I really doubt anyone without a law degree would write a petition this way. 

## Can anyone with a Ph.D. apply through this route?

Luckily for me, STEM majors are highly prefered for this process. There a list of "Critical and Emerging Technologies" that are fields with high priority for this step. The list includes areas such as Biotechnology, Artifical Inteligence, Various Engineering disciplines and fields relarted to Energy production.    

Not to look down on other fields, but it's just simpler and more straight-forward to justify usefulness with a STEM degree. This is not merely an opinion but it has been nationally-recognized by the U.S. government as this country trails behind India and China in many technology-relateds fields. 

I read online that people from non STEM fields can still get their petition aproved but, in lower rates and with hurdles.

# The uncertainty of processing times

marriage